..  SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause
    Copyright(c) 2020 Intel Corporation

Intel(R) ACC100 5G/4G FEC Poll Mode Driver
==========================================

The BBDEV ACC100 5G/4G FEC poll mode driver (PMD) supports an
implementation of a VRAN FEC wireless acceleration function.
This device is also known as Mount Bryce.

Features
--------

ACC100 5G/4G FEC PMD supports the following features:

- LDPC Encode in the DL (5GNR)
- LDPC Decode in the UL (5GNR)
- Turbo Encode in the DL (4G)
- Turbo Decode in the UL (4G)
- 16 VFs per PF (physical device)
- Maximum of 128 queues per VF
- PCIe Gen-3 x16 Interface
- MSI
- SR-IOV

ACC100 5G/4G FEC PMD supports the following BBDEV capabilities:

* For the LDPC encode operation:
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_CRC_24B_ATTACH`` :  set to attach CRC24B to CB(s)
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_RATE_MATCH`` :  if set then do not do Rate Match bypass
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_INTERLEAVER_BYPASS`` : if set then bypass interleaver

* For the LDPC decode operation:
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_CRC_TYPE_24B_CHECK`` :  check CRC24B from CB(s)
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_ITERATION_STOP_ENABLE`` :  disable early termination
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_CRC_TYPE_24B_DROP`` :  drops CRC24B bits appended while decoding
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_HQ_COMBINE_IN_ENABLE`` :  provides an input for HARQ combining
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_HQ_COMBINE_OUT_ENABLE`` :  provides an input for HARQ combining
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_INTERNAL_HARQ_MEMORY_IN_ENABLE`` :  HARQ memory input is internal
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_INTERNAL_HARQ_MEMORY_OUT_ENABLE`` :  HARQ memory output is internal
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_INTERNAL_HARQ_MEMORY_LOOPBACK`` :  loopback data to/from HARQ memory
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_INTERNAL_HARQ_MEMORY_FILLERS`` :  HARQ memory includes the fillers bits
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_DEC_SCATTER_GATHER`` :  supports scatter-gather for input/output data
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_HARQ_6BIT_COMPRESSION`` :  supports compression of the HARQ input/output
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_LDPC_LLR_COMPRESSION`` :  supports LLR input compression

* For the turbo encode operation:
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_CRC_24B_ATTACH`` :  set to attach CRC24B to CB(s)
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_RATE_MATCH`` :  if set then do not do Rate Match bypass
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_ENC_INTERRUPTS`` :  set for encoder dequeue interrupts
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_RV_INDEX_BYPASS`` :  set to bypass RV index
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_ENC_SCATTER_GATHER`` :  supports scatter-gather for input/output data

* For the turbo decode operation:
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_CRC_TYPE_24B`` :  check CRC24B from CB(s)
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_SUBBLOCK_DEINTERLEAVE`` :  perform subblock de-interleave
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_DEC_INTERRUPTS`` :  set for decoder dequeue interrupts
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_NEG_LLR_1_BIT_IN`` :  set if negative LLR encoder i/p is supported
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_POS_LLR_1_BIT_IN`` :  set if positive LLR encoder i/p is supported
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_DEC_TB_CRC_24B_KEEP`` :  keep CRC24B bits appended while decoding
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_EARLY_TERMINATION`` :  set early termination feature
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_DEC_SCATTER_GATHER`` :  supports scatter-gather for input/output data
   - ``RTE_BBDEV_TURBO_HALF_ITERATION_EVEN`` :  set half iteration granularity

Installation
------------

Section 3 of the DPDK manual provides instructions on installing and compiling DPDK.

DPDK requires hugepages to be configured as detailed in section 2 of the DPDK manual.
The bbdev test application has been tested with a configuration 40 x 1GB hugepages. The
hugepage configuration of a server may be examined using:

.. code-block:: console

   grep Huge* /proc/meminfo


Initialization
--------------

When the device first powers up, its PCI Physical Functions (PF) can be listed through this command:

.. code-block:: console

  sudo lspci -vd8086:0d5c

The physical and virtual functions are compatible with Linux UIO drivers:
``vfio`` and ``igb_uio``. However, in order to work the ACC100 5G/4G
FEC device first needs to be bound to one of these linux drivers through DPDK.


Bind PF UIO driver(s)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Install the DPDK igb_uio driver, bind it with the PF PCI device ID and use
``lspci`` to confirm the PF device is under use by ``igb_uio`` DPDK UIO driver.

The igb_uio driver may be bound to the PF PCI device using one of two methods:


1. PCI functions (physical or virtual, depending on the use case) can be bound to
the UIO driver by repeating this command for every function.

.. code-block:: console

  cd <dpdk-top-level-directory>
  insmod ./build/kmod/igb_uio.ko
  echo "8086 0d5c" > /sys/bus/pci/drivers/igb_uio/new_id
  lspci -vd8086:0d5c


2. Another way to bind PF with DPDK UIO driver is by using the ``dpdk-devbind.py`` tool

.. code-block:: console

  cd <dpdk-top-level-directory>
  ./usertools/dpdk-devbind.py -b igb_uio 0000:06:00.0

where the PCI device ID (example: 0000:06:00.0) is obtained using lspci -vd8086:0d5c


In a similar way the ACC100 5G/4G FEC PF may be bound with vfio-pci as any PCIe device.


Enable Virtual Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now, it should be visible in the printouts that PCI PF is under igb_uio control
"``Kernel driver in use: igb_uio``"

To show the number of available VFs on the device, read ``sriov_totalvfs`` file..

.. code-block:: console

  cat /sys/bus/pci/devices/0000\:<b>\:<d>.<f>/sriov_totalvfs

  where 0000\:<b>\:<d>.<f> is the PCI device ID


To enable VFs via igb_uio, echo the number of virtual functions intended to
enable to ``max_vfs`` file..

.. code-block:: console

  echo <num-of-vfs> > /sys/bus/pci/devices/0000\:<b>\:<d>.<f>/max_vfs


Afterwards, all VFs must be bound to appropriate UIO drivers as required, same
way it was done with the physical function previously.

Enabling SR-IOV via vfio driver is pretty much the same, except that the file
name is different:

.. code-block:: console

  echo <num-of-vfs> > /sys/bus/pci/devices/0000\:<b>\:<d>.<f>/sriov_numvfs


Configure the VFs through PF
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The PCI virtual functions must be configured before working or getting assigned
to VMs/Containers. The configuration involves allocating the number of hardware
queues, priorities, load balance, bandwidth and other settings necessary for the
device to perform FEC functions.

This configuration needs to be executed at least once after reboot or PCI FLR and can
be achieved by using the function ``acc100_configure()``, which sets up the
parameters defined in ``acc100_conf`` structure.

Test Application
----------------

BBDEV provides a test application, ``test-bbdev.py`` and range of test data for testing
the functionality of ACC100 5G/4G FEC encode and decode, depending on the device's
capabilities. The test application is located under app->test-bbdev folder and has the
following options:

.. code-block:: console

  "-p", "--testapp-path": specifies path to the bbdev test app.
  "-e", "--eal-params"	: EAL arguments which are passed to the test app.
  "-t", "--timeout"	: Timeout in seconds (default=300).
  "-c", "--test-cases"	: Defines test cases to run. Run all if not specified.
  "-v", "--test-vector"	: Test vector path (default=dpdk_path+/app/test-bbdev/test_vectors/bbdev_null.data).
  "-n", "--num-ops"	: Number of operations to process on device (default=32).
  "-b", "--burst-size"	: Operations enqueue/dequeue burst size (default=32).
  "-s", "--snr"		: SNR in dB used when generating LLRs for bler tests.
  "-s", "--iter_max"	: Number of iterations for LDPC decoder.
  "-l", "--num-lcores"	: Number of lcores to run (default=16).
  "-i", "--init-device" : Initialise PF device with default values.


To execute the test application tool using simple decode or encode data,
type one of the following:

.. code-block:: console

  ./test-bbdev.py -c validation -n 64 -b 1 -v ./ldpc_dec_default.data
  ./test-bbdev.py -c validation -n 64 -b 1 -v ./ldpc_enc_default.data


The test application ``test-bbdev.py``, supports the ability to configure the PF device with
a default set of values, if the "-i" or "- -init-device" option is included. The default values
are defined in test_bbdev_perf.c.


Test Vectors
~~~~~~~~~~~~

In addition to the simple LDPC decoder and LDPC encoder tests, bbdev also provides
a range of additional tests under the test_vectors folder, which may be useful. The results
of these tests will depend on the ACC100 5G/4G FEC capabilities which may cause some
testcases to be skipped, but no failure should be reported.


Alternate Baseband Device configuration tool
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

On top of the embedded configuration feature supported in test-bbdev using "- -init-device"
option mentioned above, there is also a tool available to perform that device configuration
using a companion application.
The ``pf_bb_config`` application notably enables then to run bbdev-test from the VF
and not only limited to the PF as captured above.

See for more details: https://github.com/intel/pf-bb-config

Specifically for the BBDEV ACC100 PMD, the command below can be used:

.. code-block:: console

  ./pf_bb_config ACC100 -c acc100/acc100_config_vf_5g.cfg
  ./test-bbdev.py -e="-c 0xff0 -a${VF_PCI_ADDR}" -c validation -n 64 -b 32 -l 1 -v ./ldpc_dec_default.data
